okay
so let's finish the proof that we
uh
started at the end of the lecture last
time
i usually don't end lectures in the
middle of a proof but
since
this lecture in the lecture before will
come to you at the same time
i didn't feel so bad about it
um
all right so
we're trying to prove this theorem that
if there's a rational number so that
it's equal to the supremum of this set
then x is bigger than or equal to one
and its square gives me two
okay
and so far what we've shown is that
if i have
an element a rational number
that is given by the supremum then it's
bigger than or equal to one and x
squared has to be bigger than or equal
to two
and so now we would like to show that in
fact x squared equals 2.
okay now since x squared is bigger than
or equal to 2
it's either equal to 2 or bigger than 2
and we want to show that the second
possibility
is not possible
okay so we're gonna prove that the
second possibility is not possible
uh
by contradiction so let's assume
uh that the thing that we say cannot
happen does happen and we're gonna
derive a false statement
okay
so
find h
this is going to be
x squared minus 2
over 2x all right and so
note
a couple of things that
since x squared is bigger than 2
this implies h is bigger than zero
which
implies x minus h
is less less than x
okay
so what is the contradiction going to be
it's going to be that this element x
minus h
is in fact an upper bound for uh the set
e
and this will contradict the fact that x
is the supremum in other words it's the
least upper bound for the set e there's
no upper bound for e that can be less
than x
okay
all right
so
now prove
that x minus h
is an upper bound for this set e
okay
now
let's take a look at x minus h squared
then this is equal to x squared minus 2x
h
plus h squared
now just given by if we just plug in
what h is this is equal to
x squared minus
x squared minus 2
so that's putting h in and then the 2x
here cancels with the 2x there so i just
get x squared minus 2
plus h squared
which equals 2 plus h squared now
remember h is a positive number so
2 plus a positive number this is bigger
than 2.
okay so x minus h squared is bigger than
2.
so now i want to show uh i'm going to
use this to show that x minus h is an
upper bound for e
so let q
b and e
q squared is
less than 2.
then i have q squared
is less than 2 which is less than x
minus h squared
by what we just proved here
so let
me write this out
or just summarize
that what we proved here was x minus h
squared is bigger than 2.
so we have q squared is less than 2 is
less than x minus h squared so that
means 0 is bigger than x minus h
squared minus
q squared
okay
q squared is less than this so then if i
just subtract it i get this inequality
so
that implies that 0 is bigger than now
this is the difference of two squares so
i can write this as x minus h
plus q
minus q
okay
now
uh
if i just write out what x minus h is
using the definition of h this is equal
to
x squared plus 2
over 2x
plus q
over x minus h
minus
q okay
now the product of these two numbers is
positive
this number is positive because q is
okay
and
so that means their sum is positive so i
have something positive times this so i
can divide by this positive thing and
keep the inequality so that implies that
0 is less than
x minus h minus q
which implies that
q is less than x minus h
all right so we started off with an
element of e an arbitrary element of e
and we proved that q is less than x
minus h
thus for all q and e
q is less than
x minus h which implies that x minus h
is an upper bound
for e
but so um
let me keep that board for now
[Applause]
while i write the last uh sentence or so
of this proof
so
we
stated that x minus h is an upper bound
for e
which implies since x is the supremum of
e it should be less than or equal to all
upper bounds
which implies h is less than or equal to
0 but this is a direct contradiction to
h being a positive number
so this is a
the false statement we ultimately prove
okay but the idea is that
if x squared is bigger than two you can
find a lower bound i mean an upper bound
which is strictly smaller than x which
con contradicts the fact that x is the
greatest lower bound for e
okay
so
but remember what was our original
assumption to begin with
in this line of reasoning
that was that x squared is
bigger than 2.
and that concludes the proof
okay
all right so
this was a statement about just if i
have some element that's a rational
number and it's equal to the supremum
then its square has to be two
now i'm going to prove that
basically no such element uh exists
and therefore that the rational numbers
do not have the least upper bound
property which was the discussion above
um those two lines in that circle
on that board up there so
um
what's theorem we're going to prove
the set e
as before
so this is a
rational numbers such that q is bigger
than zero
q squared is less than two
is
is bounded above and
has no
supremum
in cube
okay
so i'm not just saying that
so this set e sits inside my
kind of ordered
set which is my universe q
i'm not saying that it doesn't have a
supremum in e i'm saying it doesn't have
a supremum in the universe
where it sits
okay and therefore the rational numbers
do not have
um
the least upper bound property because
this set is a set which is bounded above
and has no supremum in q
so
um
okay so
the first uh thing i want to show is
that this set e is bounded
above um
that
q b and e
then
q squared is less than two
which is less than four so this tells me
four minus q squared is positive
which
tells me 2 minus q
times 2 plus q
is positive
now since 2 is positive and q is
positive 2 plus q is positive so i can
divide both sides of this inequality by
this 2 plus q without changing the
inequality
which implies i'm just going to flip
this inequality
thus
for all q and e
q is less than 2.
okay so 2 is an upper bound for the set
e
okay
so that proves that the set e is bounded
above
[Applause]
so now i'm going to prove that no
supreme exists
by using the previous theorem which says
if
i have a supremum then its square must
be 2.
okay
so now we show
at the soup of e
does not exist and we do this by
contradiction now i know it seems like a
lot of the proofs we're doing are by
contradiction this should not give you
the impression that all proofs should be
done by contradiction
many proofs that you will do in uh
homework
can be done directly
okay meaning
um
not by contradiction
for example this first
little proof that e is bounded above
this is a direct um
proof meaning i proved directly that
it's bounded above i do not assume that
it's not bounded above
and
arrive at a contradiction
but uh
you know it is proof by contradiction is
very tempting because
it at least gets you
going
somewhere if you can assume not then you
get to the next step which
you know this assumption implies
something else and hopefully you can
keep going until you arrive at something
false
but many
uh theorems that you want to prove can
be done directly
all right but not this one now we show
the supremum of the set does not exist
so
my contradiction
so we will assume that such a supreme
does exist
so suppose the supreme exists
uh
and
call it x all right so x is the supremum
of this set
okay so by the previous theorem since x
is an element of the rational numbers
um
which whose square gives me
who's this which is the supremum of this
set then x is bigger than or equal to 1
and its square is 2.
by the previous theorem
x is bigger than or equal to one
and x squared equals
two okay in fact x has to be bigger than
one
cannot equal one because the square
would give me one not two
all right so i can i can make that
statement that x is in fact bigger than
one not just bigger than or equal to
okay
so
thus
since x is a rational
there exists m
in natural numbers
such that
m is bigger than n
and x is equal to
m over n
okay so that just
that's what it means for x to be a
rational number
and for
it to be bigger than one
thus
there exists an n
such that n times x
is a natural number
all right just multiplying through by n
that means that n times x is equal to m
which is a natural number
so let s
be the set
of natural numbers so that when i
multiply x by
k i get a natural number and so what
we've shown just based on our assumption
is that s is non-empty right because n
is an s
now this is a subset of natural numbers
so by the well ordering property of n
this set s has a least element
which we'll call
k0
ns
okay
so
what i'm going to show is that in fact
this little guy
k0 is not in fact the least element of
this set s
all right which would contradict exactly
how it's defined
okay
so
to find k1
to be
a 0x
minus k0 and note
this is an integer why because
k 0 times x so k 0 is in the set s
meaning k 0 times x is a natural number
so it's an integer
k 0 is a natural number so the
difference of two integers
is again an integer all right so k 0 is
a natural number k 0 times x is a
natural number so the difference of two
natural numbers gives me an integer
okay
but in fact it's a natural number
so
it's a natural number
okay
so let's go over here
so so far we have that k1 is a natural
number
and
i'm going to prove that k1 is actually
less than k0
so
since x squared equals 2
i should say
okay so let's write it this way since x
squared is equal to 2 this implies
that um
4 minus x squared is positive i mean i
just wrote down 2. 4 minus x squared is
just 2.
so this tells me taking the difference 2
minus x times 2
plus x is positive 2 and x are positive
so i can divide this inequality through
by this term and maintain the inequality
which implies 2 minus x is positive
and therefore
x is less than 2.
okay so x is less than 2.
then
k1 which remember is k0 times x minus 1
is less than
k0 so k0 is a natural number it's
positive x minus 1
is
bounded by 2 minus 1
equals k0
okay
so what we've shown is so far is that
this number k1
is a natural number
and
it's less than k zero so i guess i don't
have to write this
positive part
okay
now
let's remember what k 0 was supposed to
be k 0 is supposed to be
the smallest element of this set s it's
the smallest natural number so that when
i multiply it by x i get another natural
number
and
from this k 0 i constructed a new
natural number called k 1
which is less than k zero
and it's a natural number
but
here comes the fun part
if we compute
what x times k 1 is
this is by definition x times
x times k 0 minus k 0
this is equal to x squared
k 0 minus x times k 0
which equals 2
k 0
minus
x times k 0 because x squared equals 2.
and this last part this is equal to
k 0
plus um
k0 minus x
k0 which equals
k1
okay
now that's a natural number that's a
natural number this natural number is
bigger than this natural number
therefore their difference is again a
natural number
so this says that x times k1 is a
thus
k1
is in
s
and k 1 is less than k 0
which
implies k 0
is not
the least element
in s
which is a contradiction
to the fact that it is the least element
of s
okay
so
what we've shown is
uh
assuming that
this set e has a supremum in
the rational numbers
then we arrive at a contradiction
okay so our original assumption must be
false
thus um
soup e does not exist
[Applause]
all right so this proof is maybe a
little different than
if you've seen a proof of uh
the fact that the square root of two is
not a rational number you know there's
a different proof that maybe is a little
bit simpler but you know this one uses
ordering instead to prove it
which i thought was pretty cool and it's
originally due to dedicant
okay
so
we discussed
one aspect of the real numbers
um
that was in that theorem that i stated
earlier which i'll restate in this in a
minute
namely that it is a
set that has the least upper bound
property okay so i stated that as a
theorem i'm not going to prove that
theorem
we just want to understand exactly what
these what sets the real numbers apart
and one aspect of that there were two
things one is that it's an ordered field
and two is that it has the least upper
bound property so we've now discussed
what the least upper bound property
means
so
we just need to fill in one other part
about the real numbers which is
uh the fact that it's an ordered field
so
and as i said before
q is also an ordered field
r is not special in that respect
but as the theorem
stated
at the
middle of the last lecture that r is in
fact the unique ordered field with the
least upper bound property remember
we've just proven that q does not have
the least upper bound property so in
some sense q is missing stuff
okay
it's missing stuff it's missing
square roots of 2 which is kind of an
algebraic
thing namely i can't solve the equation
x squared minus 2 equals 0 and the
rational numbers
and the fact that it's missing that you
know you have this kind of algebraic
defect
manifests itself in this fact that q is
also missing
uh
things with respect to an order okay
so q
in short this is me saying that q has
holes all right
and r
um
does not
i mean
that is
probably the you know
most basic statement one can make uh
about r but
um and perhaps you heard in high school
calculus and you're hearing repeated now
but in a nutshell i mean you know q has
holes and r does not but this means
something very specifically that r
has
the least upper bound property and q
does not okay
all right so uh let me talk about what
um ordered fields are so first off
i need to define what a field is
so
a set f is a field
if it has two operations
plus and
i'm going to put a dot here in the
middle
times basically
such that
you have a list of properties that hold
with respect to these operations
okay the first uh
is with respect to
so this is plus this is times this is
addition multiplication okay so the
first condition is that
this set is closed with respect to
taking
sums so
if x y is an f
then
x plus y is an f
this
operation of
addition should be commutative
commutativity i hope that's how you
spell it
this means that for all
x y and
f x plus y equals y plus x
associativity
so this is a condition that for all x y
z and f
if i add x
and y
and then add z this is equal to
adding x to the sum of y and z
the fourth is that we have
what's called an identity
element
an additive identity element there
exists an element which i'll label 0 in
this set f
such that
for all x and f 0 plus x
equals 0.
and
we also have
additive inverses
namely
for all x and f there exists an element
which i call
which i label minus x
and f
such that x plus
minus x
equals zero
okay so these are the conditions on
addition
that should be satisfied for a field
okay
so that's about addition so the
conditions for multiplication are
similar
namely it needs to be closed with
respect to multiplication so
if x y
is in f
then
x times y
is in f
multiplication should also be
commutative
so
i'm just going to abbreviate that
commutative as com
for all x
y and f
x times y
equals y times x we also have
associativity
well let's not shorten it by that
for all x y
z and f i multiply x times y and then
multiply it by z it's the same as
taking x and multiplying it by y times z
fourth property is uh the existence of
a multiplicative identity there exists
an element which i label as 1
in the set f
such that for all x and f
1 times x equals x
and then i also have
uh multiplicative
inverses for nonzero elements
for all x and f
take away zero so for everything in the
field that's non-zero
there exists an element which i call x
to the minus 1
and f
such that
x times x to the minus 1 equals 1.
okay now these are statements about the
two operations there's one last
assumption
in the definition
that connects the two and that's
the distributive law namely that
for all x y z
and f
if i take
x plus
y times z this is
x times z plus
y times z
okay so all these
conditions
so a field is a set with two operations
plus
and dot meaning multiplication and these
two operations need to satisfy all of
these conditions for my set to be called
a field okay
so the clearest example is of course
rational numbers
with the usual plus and minus i mean
plus in multiplication
define as you
learned
as a child
now what's a non-example
uh the integers so
the integers come with plus and
multiplication however it doesn't
satisfy
the existence of
inverses of multiplicative inverses m5
but it does satisfy everything else
and
typically
one would call z what's uh called a
commutative commutative
ring commutative because multiplication
is also commutative
but a ring in general does not
necessarily have to satisfy
a multiplication uh
being commutative for example the set of
say two by two matrices
form a ring
what's an example of another what's a
another example of a field what we have
kind of maybe i should have given this
one first z2 which is the simplest
field there is is just the element of
two it's just a set of two elements zero
and one
where i need to define what one plus one
is
one plus one defined to be zero okay
so and
one plus one is zero
and uh
yeah that's it i mean zero times zero
would be zero zero times one would be 0
0 plus 0 would be 0 and that gives you
all of the
rules you need to know to be able to
define multiplication and addition on
this set
of these two elements
this is a field because
um what is the inverse of one well it's
just one okay and you can check that if
i define addition by this
uh rule along with the
you know
other rules that uh
and
along with
[Applause]
that these
defining plus and multiplication this
way satisfies all the conditions of
being a field
okay
a more non-trivial example
would be let's say z3
this is a set 0
1 2.
only now
the arithmetic so this i didn't use such
a fancy word here uh but arithmetic is
done
uh mod 3 here here it was mod 2 meaning
i
if i want to add two elements i add them
and then i take the remainder
of that sum
after dividing by three so
here
addition is defined
mod 3. so if something is a multiple of
3 then i equate it to 0.
so for example
1 plus 2 which gives me 3 it's a
multiple of 3. this is defined to be 0.
okay
2 times 2 which equals 4 which equals 3
plus 1
multiples of 3 or 0 so that gives me 1.
in particular this tells me that in this
field
2 times two equals one
so the multiplicative inverse of two is
given by itself two
all right
and uh a times b equals
let's say d
mod 3. all right
okay so it's another example of a field
[Applause]
so there
in fact if you take
uh
mod p where p is a prime you get another
field you get a finite field so these
are examples of what are called finite
fields because exactly that they are
fields and they have finite number of
elements
um
now
okay
based on just these assumptions that uh
you assume your field to satisfy i mean
for it to be a field you can prove kind
of
all of the
simple algebra statements that you've
ever known simply from these axioms
of fields
so for example let me just give you kind
of the silliest uh example of a
statement you can prove just using these
elements i mean these axioms you can
prove the statement that
for all x and f if f is so f is a field
here
so f throughout will be
if x is a field then for all x and f
0 times x
is 0.
ok all we know about 0 is that when you
add it to x
you get x back actually this should have
been
yeah yeah this should this is wrong this
should have been x
okay
make sure there's no other
errors i don't think there are this is
another
danger about
not being able to
lecture in person
is that
errors on the board
persist
um okay so you can prove this
blockbuster theorem
just using these axioms
so
let's do a
quick proof of this if x is in f then 0
is equal to
0 times x
plus
the additive inverse of 0 times x
because that's just the definition of
the additive inverse every element has
an additive inverse
and now
0 is equal to 0 plus 0.
times x plus again the additive inverse
of x
and now i use the distributive law this
is 0 times x plus
0 times x plus
the additive inverse of 0 times x
and
that cancels with that and i get 0 times
x so i started off with 0 and i
arrived at
it's equal to 0 times x all right
so
um
and you can prove other
simple um
algebraic statements using these axioms
as well i think it'll put in the
assignment
and i'll just state you can also prove
things like if i want to look at minus x
then
this is equal to the additive inverse of
one times x
okay i mean this is like you know it's
not um
terribly interesting at the start
there are
you know essentially some some very deep
theorems in algebra that you learn at a
another point in your life
but that won't be in this class
actually today is probably all we're
going to talk about fields which are
algebraic things
you know algebraic things are
[Music]
to me you know nice
because somehow you always deal with
equality
so how hard could it be to prove two
things are equal to each other
yet analysis deals a lot with inequality
um which somehow is
um much more subtle but that's just a
little bias
um
okay so this is what a field is a field
is just again this set that has these
two operations what is an ordered field
so it's
a field first off
and which is also
an ordered set
but it can't just you know you can't
have uh
two different structures on your field
and them not interact for that to be
interesting
so
such that
the
algebraic structure and the
order on the field are
cohabitating nicely meaning
you have two conditions for all x y z
and f
if x is less than y then
x plus z is less than y plus z
and one other condition
if x is positive or x if x is bigger
than zero
and y is bigger than zero
then
x times y is bigger than zero
okay
and i just use that terminology anyways
right now but for an ordered field f
if an element is bigger than zero
then we call it positive
or if it's bigger than or equal to zero
we say x is positive
and respectively
non-negative
so non-negative if x is bigger than or
equal to 0 positive of x is positive
bigger than 0.
and then likewise with negative and
non-positive
okay
and so the the most basic example again
is q q is an ordered field all right
with the usual order
and with the
usual algebraic structure on cue
okay
what is not an example is
either one of the
two fields
i wrote down just a minute a minute ago
so and non-example
is uh this field here
zero one um
so
you know if i put an order on this
either zero is less than one or one is
less than zero so remember order does
not have to
you know necessarily correspond to the
fact that that zero you connect to zero
and the integers and that one you
connect to one and the integers i mean
these are just two elements of a set and
an order would be saying either that
element is less than that element or
that element is less than that element
so let's consider either cases and
suppose we have that order on this set
and show that it's not
it does not turn this set into an
ordered field
so
then either
0 is less than 1
or 1 is less than 0.
so
let's do the first case
zero is less than one
if zero is less than one
then
what happens if i add one to each side
1 plus 0 would give me 1 1 plus 1 would
be 0 and therefore
is not so less than
1 plus 1. so it does not satisfy
the first property
so if i have an order on z2 uh
two possibilities either zero is less
than one or one is less than zero if
zero is less than one then by half by
the definition of addition on this set i
would
if i add one to zero i get one if i add
one to one i get zero and therefore if i
were to add one to both sides i would
not get a true inequality because i'm
assuming zero is less than one
so this condition number one does not
hold
for this order and neither does it hold
for choosing one is less than zero
by the same logic then one
so one plus one
is not less than
okay
so this set is not
uh
this field cannot be turned into an
ordered field and
essentially the same thing that i've
done here
shows that you cannot have any
finite ordered field
okay so
so in general there are no finite
ordered fields
okay
now just like we proved
[Applause]
the blockbuster statement that zero
times
anything in the field equals zero
we can also prove
all of the
you know
manipulations of inequalities that you
use
without
fear
simply from again
these axioms about it an order field
being a field and also satisfying these
two inequalities
i mean these two
conditions here for it to be an ordered
field so for example
if
if f is an ordered field
then
if x is an element of f and x is
positive
this implies
its additive inverse is negative
and vice versa okay if x is less than 0
then
minus x is positive
okay so
you know i know it's tempting to to kind
of think
well yeah just multiply this inequality
by minus one to get this inequality um
but remember this is really a statement
about the additive inverse of x okay
um
okay so
so the proof is not hard
if x is positive
then
well i could write it this way
right it's 0 is less than x
then by property number 1
i can add anything to both sides and get
the same inequality and preserve the
inequality therefore minus x
plus 0 is less than
the additive inverse of x
plus x
now by
the fact that 0 is the additive identity
a4 the left side is going to be minus x
and by the definition of the additive
inverse of x the right hand side is
going to be 0.
okay and that's it
so what's going in here is this is by
a 4 and a 5
and this previous statement is by
1 in this definition before and i'm not
going to prove um this statement as well
it's the same essentially the same proof
i add minus x to both sides and use
which i can do by one and then i use a4
and a5 to conclude that x is um
that minus x is positive
okay
so
[Applause]
let me just say see
proposition
1.1.8
in
textbook
for
the other
let's say
the other proofs of
standard
inequality
manipulations
okay
so
q is an ordered field
and as i stated in um
before about r r will also r is also an
ordered field um
but it has the least upper bound
property
so maybe you are asking yourself
um
how about uh some sort of greatest lower
bound property
you know the least upper bound property
is about soups
can we make a similar property about
imps
are there sets that have uh
you know the least upper bound property
that
don't have say a greatest lower bound
property meaning
um
you know does there exist uh
something has the greatest lower bound
property if
um
every
non-empty set which is bounded below has
an infimum that's kind of what i'm
referring to even though i haven't
written it down
so
okay what is that leading up to
in the setting of ordered fields there
really is no difference between a least
upper bound property and a greatest
lower bound property
if i have an ordered field which
satisfies the least upper bound property
then it also satisfies a
greatest lower bound property
so
which
i'll state as a theorem
then we'll proof
let f be
an ordered field
with the least upper bound
property
now i'm going to prove that it has
if you like a greatest lower lower bound
property
then
if a is a subset of f
which is non-empty
and
bounded below
then
if a
exists
and f meaning a has an infimum
in the set f
okay
so the proof of this is basically
in some sense we kind of did
something similar when we proved that
that one set
given by all the minus one minus two
minus three
had the greatest upper bound property or
the least upper bound property
by taking its minus
and then using in a sense the greatest
lower bound property of the natural
numbers
this well ordering principle
to conclude that that set had the least
upper bound property and that's what
we're going to do here
is we're going to take a set which is
bounded below
take its minus if you like
which is now bounded above
take the soup of that set which we can
do and show that that's the infimum of
uh
that set
so
let me write over here this is
it should be
you know not part of the proof but kind
of some intuition
and i'll draw it like
f is the real number line which it is
because
part of the statement about the real
numbers is that it's the unique ordered
field with the least upper bound
property but um
don't worry about that for now
let's imagine we have a set a
and
for now i'll draw it like it's an
interval
which is bounded below okay so it stops
after some
point and it's there's nothing there so
it's bounded below then if i look at
minus a
so here i'm drawing 0. if i look at
minus a which is the set of elements
uh the set of the additive inverses of a
i now have a set which is bounded above
so if this is a
lower bound for a
then minus b will be an upper bound for
minus a
and therefore minus a has at least upper
bound which in this picture i'm drawing
looks like
x
and so then
my goal is then to show that
so here let's go back to b
here's a
here's now minus x
to show that minus x is an infimum of a
right so that's that's the basic
intuition
on why this holds we're using
the ordered field property to be able to
take minuses
okay
that's where the field property is
coming in and that minuses although we
didn't prove this it is one of those
um
essentially we did prove this that if i
have something positive and i multiply
it through by minus one
using this as well
then that reverses the inequality
okay
um but again it's these are short
you know
unless i'm telling you to prove a
certain inequality a simple inequality
statement like
of this type
you know um
feel fr you know just freely use kind of
the inequality facts that you remember
from
um high school
okay
and just know that these persist for
ordered fields with the least
ordered fields in general
okay
so let's turn this intuition into a
proof
suppose a so i'm not stating it here but
f is an ordered field with the least
upper bound property i'll
go ahead and state it um
f
is an ordered
field
with the least upper bound property
let a be
subset
of f
a not equal to empty set
a
bounded below
then that means there exists
an element b
and f
such that
b is less than or equal to a
such that for all a and capital a b is
less than or equal to a
okay
[Applause]
so i mean the proof is essentially there
okay and
you just need to turn it into english
um
because we're in massachusetts if you're
a different country you turn into the
language that's spoken there you just
need to turn it into into written word
so there exists a lower bound for a
um
me just note another set called minus
which i'll label minus a this is the set
of all elements in f
of the form minus uh the additive
inverses of a as a is in
capital a
all right so it's the additive inverses
of all elements in capital a
then
the fact that
i have for all a and a
b is less than or equal to a implies
for all a
and a
minus a is less than or equal to minus b
because multiplying through by -1 flips
the inequality
okay
that implies so
minus b is bigger than or equal to every
element of minus a so that implies b is
an upper bound
for the set minus a
so
minus a is a non-empty subset of f which
is bounded above
therefore it has a supremum
thus there exists
an x and f
such that
x equals soup
of this set minus a
this is
because we're assuming the least upper
bound property that every non-empty set
which is bounded above has a supremum
okay
i'm going to show this guy x is in fact
the infimum
of this set a or minus x is the infimum
of a
so the fact that x is the supremum of
minus a implies that
for all a and capital a
minus a is less than or equal to x
because x is supposed to be
uh the least upper bound so it's in fact
an upper bound
so that means that for all a
and a again just flipping the
inequalities minus x is less than or
equal to a
which implies minus x is a lower bound
for capital a
we now have to show
that minus x is the greatest lower bound
of a if i take any other lower bound of
a
then
minus x is bigger than or equal to that
lower bound
now show
that if
let's call it something else
if y
is
lower bound for
a
then
y is less than or equal to minus x
and then that concludes the proof
showing that minus x is in fact the
infimum of a
and therefore a has
uh an infimum we've actually identified
what the infimum is it's the soup of
minus a
okay um
so
let y be a lower bound
for a
then exactly how i showed this for this
single lower bound that i had for a
you can verify this again just go
through the argument and replace b with
y
then minus y
is an upper bound
just look at the picture you know
replace b with y
or minus a
which implies since x is a supremum of
a
so since x is a supremum of minus a it's
the least upper bound so it has to be
less than or equal to minus y
and flipping the inequality again on
that means that
y is less than or equal to minus x
okay and which is what we wanted to
prove
thus
the imp of a exists and we've in fact
showed that it's equal to
the soup of minus a
okay so in an ordered field
not only with the least upper bound
property not only does
every set which is bounded above have a
supremum
every set which is bounded below has an
end femur
okay
so now we move on
and not talk about generalities but
we're just going to focus on
uh
r the set of real numbers and i'm just
going to again state this theorem
about the existence of r and its
properties so just to bring this all
back to
our goal of
describing exactly
what r is or what
separates it
from q is that
so there exists a unique
ordered field
with the least upper bound property
um
containing q
okay and this field
we denote by
r
okay
so q does
just to bring this back so we started
off
in ancient times
with
you know the natural numbers
we moved to the integers so that we can
take additive inverses although they
didn't call them that but
and we wanted 0
and then we moved to the rational
numbers because
we didn't have ways to
you know solve the equation 2x plus 1
equals 0.
and
so we moved on from q to r
essentially because
we can't solve the equation x squared
minus 2 equals 0
and
this
inability to solve x squared minus 2
equals 0 although an algebraic fact
you know in fact
means that q is incomplete as an ordered
set okay it does not have this least
upper bound property
and
you know what characterizes the real
numbers
is that
it is an ordered field containing q
and it's the unique one with the least
upper bound property
this unique
is
should be kind of in quotes
um because unique up to what's called
isomorphism
isomorphism is is a fancy way
of
you know saying what you call
apples i call manzanas
essentially
okay so this is what r is it's the
unique ordered field with the least
upper bound
property containing q and um
from so i'm not going to prove this
theorem the way you
usually prove this theorem you construct
r
either as what are called dedican cuts
or
as equivalence classes of koshi
sequences we'll talk about koshi
sequences
soon ish
but
i'm more interested in
you know proving properties about r
and then going on to functions on our
limits uh which is what analysis is is
the study of limits
um
rather than get tied up in in really
non-analytic facts uh you know algebraic
facts and trying to construct this this
r
uh the actual field so we're just gonna
take this as a given and now we're gonna
go from here and start
proving facts about real numbers
okay
you know
where q failed
r
succeeds
so
first fact is that there exists a unique
element in r
such that r is positive
and r squared equals 2. so we saw before
that
if i replace this with q rational number
that's false okay there does not exist a
rational number whose square is 2. but
in the real numbers there does
and right now maybe you're tempted to
just say yeah you said r equal to square
root of 2. well what is square root of 2
you know i mean
how do you come up with that guy so we
have to come up with
some element of r whose square is 2. now
we basically did that a minute ago in
the rational numbers and kind of the
same proof works here
so
let e
be the set of all x's in r
such that
x is positive
and x squared is less than 2. so
earlier in the lecture and at the end of
the last lecture
we had q here right
well the same
uh
proof basically and what we did earlier
then e
is a bounded is bounded above by two
so r
which i
so
soup e
tilde
exists
in r so i have this set it's bounded
above by two i mean we did the proof
earlier
so
by the least upper bound property of r
the supremum exists okay call this
element little r
then the same proof i'm not going to do
it again because
we've already done it
and all you need to do is replace
our cues with ours
shows r is bigger than or equal to one
in fact it's bigger than one
and
r squared equals two
okay so there does exist
an element of r
which is positive and whose square is
two
now
i will prove that it's unique
so now i want to prove that r is unique
that means
if i take if there's some other element
in capital r that satisfies these two
inequalities then it must be equal to my
original r
so suppose
our tilde is in r
our tilde is bigger than zero
and r tilde squared equals two
okay
then
since their square is the same number
namely 2 0 is equal to r
tilde minus r
squared
which equals
r tilde plus r
r tilde minus r
now both r
and r tilde are positive so r plus r
tilde is positive in particular it's
non-zero so since it's a field i can
therefore divide or multiply both sides
by the additive inverse of this thing
and arrive at 0 is equal to r
tilde minus r or
r equals r tilde so there exists only
one element in the real numbers which is
positive and whose square is two
and i'll put it on the assignment
namely that so this shows
what square root of two exists
okay
but you can
then show
and
[Music]
cube root of 2 exists in r
and we'll not prove this
but you can show in general
that if
x is in r
then
x to the 1 over x 1 over n
i should say x is positive
[Applause]
for all natural numbers
okay
so where q failed
r succeeds
and
it's doing this or the fact that it does
succeed
is
you know not coming from an algebraic
property of r
it's coming from
this property about its order
okay
all right
we'll stop there
you